NIRA v0.4 is a local-first assistant with visible offline status, local storage, and explicit side-effect approval.
The real runtime reports healthy deterministic-offline mode. Chat works without pretending that a local model is running.
Conversation history is local and user-controlled: search, open, pin, rename, export, and confirmed deletion.
The first real tool inspects this repository while excluding virtual environments, dependencies, caches, and build output.
The second tool reads bounded workspace content. An attempted path escape is rejected without reading the outside file.
A coding plan reaches process execution and pauses. Denial is the safe default, stops the task, and is never auto-retried.
Permission evidence stores the tool, access class, verdict, and reason—never the raw arguments.
A second verification is approved once. The narrow compile command runs through the same registry and permission boundary.
Release evidence: 49 tests, clean dependency and secret scans, and a wheel verified outside the source tree.
Honest limitation: no real model profile, optional voice and PyQt outside core, and retrieval/accessibility evaluation still pending.